Environments: include other environments, optional include destination (#50207)
spack/spack: lib/spack/docs/environments.rst

Reviewer: (Just a suggestion, which could be discussed as possibly controversial. Can be done in a following PR) I would try to keep:
1. Including a remote `spack.yaml` into the local `spack.yaml`
2. Including a concrete environment into the local environment

two separate sections, instead of being two sub-sections of the "Including Environments" section. The rationale is that the use cases are very different, so we might introduce them better if they are separate from each other.

Adding Abstract Specs
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> The most important component of an environment is its list of abstract specs.

Reviewer 2: I think this isn't necessarily true. An environment (especially after this PR) may just be some config that someone wants to share.

Author: Fair point though if there are no abstract specs associated with the environment then there is nothing to build, right?

Reviewer 2: The point is that I could do this in my own environment:

```yaml
spack:
  include:
    - git: https://github.com/llnl/lc-spack
      commit: 9be36efacf1a5fe750b35758030f3ecccf0aa0da
      paths:
        - elcap/rocm-6.1
  specs:
    - py-torch
    - myapp
    - tool1
    - tool2
```

And my specs would build with whatever LC's preferred settings for that ROCm on that machine are, and the user does not have to set anything up.

I would argue that the most important part of the (currently fictitious) `lc-spack` environments is their configuration, which allows others not to have to duplicate it or even think about it.  They eventually provide specs, but in the including environment, not the included one.

Author: I did get your point. Thanks for the extra clarification.

An abstract spec is the user-specified spec before Spack applies defaults or dependency information.

Users can add abstract specs to an environment using the ``spack add`` command and.

> The result is the spec is added as a root spec of the environment in the user input, or manifest, file (``spack.yaml``).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can add abstract specs to an environment with the ``spack add`` command, which adds each abstract spec as a root of the environment in the ``spack.yaml`` file.
```

The addition of abstract specs does not affect the concrete specs in the lock file (``spack.lock``) nor results in the automatic installation of the added specs.

> Instead, the environment must be :ref:`re-concretized <cmd-spack-concretize>` or :ref:`(re)installed <installing-environment>`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Adding an abstract spec does not affect concrete specs in the lock file (``spack.lock``), and it does not automatically install the added specs.
Instead, the environment must be :ref:`re-concretized <cmd-spack-concretize>` or :ref:`(re)installed <installing-environment>`.
```

> Instead, the environment must be :ref:`re-concretized <cmd-spack-concretize>` or :ref:`(re)installed <installing-environment>`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Adding an abstract specs does not immediately install anything, nor does it affect the ``spack.lock`` file.
To update the lockfile, the environment must be :ref:`re-concretized <cmd-spack-concretize>`, and to update any installations, the environment must be :ref:`(re)installed <installing-environment>`.
```

Many Spack commands also affect configuration information in files automatically.
Those commands take a ``--scope`` argument, and the environment can be specified by ``env:NAME`` (to affect environment ``foo``, set ``--scope env:foo``).
These commands will automatically manipulate configuration inline in the ``spack.yaml`` file.

Inline configurations
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Inline environment-scope configuration is done using the same yaml format as standard Spack configuration scopes, covered in the :ref:`configuration` section.
Each section is contained under a top-level yaml object with its name.
For example, a ``spack.yaml`` manifest file containing some package preference configuration (as in a ``packages.yaml`` file) could contain:

.. code-block:: yaml

   spack:
     # ...
     packages:
       all:
         providers:
           mpi: [openmpi]
     # ...

This configuration sets the default mpi provider to be openmpi.

.. _included_configurations:

Included configurations
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Spack environments allow an ``include`` heading in their yaml schema.
This heading pulls in external configuration **and** environment files and applies them to the environment.

> (See :ref:`environment_inclusion` for more information on including environment files.)

Reviewer: (Comment, not necessarily for this PR) There is quite a bit of redundancy between this part and the `includes.yaml` section. Wondering if we can just refer to the other section to explain the mechanics of `include:`.

       branch: main
     - path: /path/to/$os/$target/environment
       optional: true
     - path: /path/to/os-specific/config-dir
       when: os == "ventura"

Included configuration files are required *unless* they are explicitly optional or the entry's condition evaluates to ``false``.
Optional includes are specified with the ``optional`` clause and conditional with the ``when`` clause.
(See :ref:`include-yaml` for more information on optional and conditional entries.)

Configuration files are listed using paths to individual files or directories containing them.
Path entries may be absolute or relative to the environment or specified as URLs.
URLs to individual files must link to the **raw** form of the file's contents (e.g., `GitHub <https://docs.github.com/en/repositories/working-with-files/using-files/viewing-and-understanding-files#viewing-or-copying-the-raw-file-content>`_ or `GitLab <https://docs.gitlab.com/ee/api/repository_files.html#get-raw-file-from-repository>`_) **and** include a valid sha256 for the file.
Only the ``file``, ``ftp``, ``http`` and ``https`` protocols (or schemes) are supported.
Spack-specific, environment and user path variables can be used.

> (See :ref:`config-file-variables` for more information.)

Reviewer 3: This paragraph needs to be reworked to clarify that includes can come from git repos in addition to paths/urls.

.. warning::

   Nested includes are not currently processed in a breadth-first manner so the value of a configuration option that is altered by multiple included files may not be what you expect.
   This will be addressed in a future update.

.. _configuration_precedence:

Configuration precedence
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Inline configurations take precedence over included configurations, so you don't have to change shared configuration files to make small changes to an individual environment.
Included configurations listed earlier will have higher precedence, as the included configs are applied in reverse order.

.. _environment_inclusion:

Including Environments
----------------------

Spack environments can build on other environments.
You can think of them as combinations of existing environments.

> A combined environment is one in which Spack starts with the enclosing environment's configuration then adds configuration the from the existing environments that it includes.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
A Spack environment consists of configuration files, and like any other configuration files can be included in another environment.
```
I think the language about combination here is distracting from the main point, making it sound like this behaves differently from other includes.

> A combined environment is one in which Spack starts with the enclosing environment's configuration then adds configuration the from the existing environments that it includes.

Reviewer: Typo:
```suggestion
A combined environment is one in which Spack starts with the enclosing environment's configuration then adds configuration from the existing environments that it includes.
```
Also, the sentence as is is not super clear to me 🤔 

Maybe we can start from a simple motivating use case, and show how including a remote environment allows to have a shared "base configuration" among multiple users, that can be overridden by the enclosing environment.

You can specify the environment's abstract configuration by including its ``spack.yaml``.
The included abstract configuration contained in the ``spack.yaml`` is added to that of the enclosing environment's ``spack.yaml`` in memory according to the configuration precedence described in :ref:`configuration_precedence`.

Alternatively, you can add the concretized specs of an environment by including its ``spack.lock`` file.
Spack will add the concrete specs to those of the enclosing environment's ``spack.lock`` file, resulting in a combined concrete environment.

.. note::

   You can add environments by specifying local and remote paths just as you would :ref:`include configuration files <included_configurations>`.
   They can be listed along with other configuration and environments.

.. warning::

   If you include a remote repository or local directory, the abstract environment takes precedence.
   In other words, Spack will choose the ``spack.yaml`` file over all other configuration files by default.
   If you want other configuration files included, you will need to explicitly specify them.

>    If you want to include a concrete environment, you will similarly need to explicitly include its ``spack.lock`` file.

Reviewer: Instead of this being a warning, can we move it in the `include_yaml.rst` paragraph as a brief section?

.. code-block:: spec

   $ spack env create myenv
   $ spack -e myenv add python
   $ spack -e myenv concretize
   $ spack env create --include-concrete myenv combined_concrete_env

You can also include a concrete environment directly in the ``spack.yaml`` file under the ``include`` heading followed by the absolute path to the concrete environment's ``spack.lock`` file.
(See :ref:`included_configurations` for more information.)
Note that you may use Spack config variables such as ``$spack`` or environment variables as long as the expression expands to an absolute path.
(See :ref:`config-file-variables` for more information.)

Below is an example of a combined concrete environment:

.. code-block:: yaml

   spack:
     include:
     - /absolute/path/to/environment1/spack.lock
     - $spack/../path/to/environment2/spack.lock
     specs: []
     concretizer:
       unify: true

Once the ``spack.yaml`` file has been updated you must concretize the environment to get the concrete specs from included concrete environments added to the combined environment's ``spack.lock`` file.

Updating a combined concrete environment
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> If changes are made to the included environment that you want reflected in the combined environment, you will need to re-concretize both the included environment then the combined environment for the changes to be integrated.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Updating an environment that includes concrete specs from another environment
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
Concrete specs included from another environment are updated based on the included environment's state at concretization time of the including environment.
To incorporate changes from the manifest of the included environment, first concretize the included environment and then reconcretize the including environment to integrate the changes.
```
I don't think the "combined" environment vocabulary was helping us here.

This configuration sets the default mpi provider to be openmpi.

.. _included_configurations:

Included configurations
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Spack environments allow an ``include`` heading in their yaml schema.
This heading pulls in external configuration **and** environment files and applies them to the environment.

> (See :ref:`environment_inclusion` for more information on including environment files.)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`include:` pulls in external configuration (including other environments) and applies them to the environment.
(See :ref:`environment_inclusion` for more information on including environment files.)
```

Inline configurations take precedence over included configurations, so you don't have to change shared configuration files to make small changes to an individual environment.
Included configurations listed earlier will have higher precedence, as the included configs are applied in reverse order.

.. _environment_inclusion:

Including Environments
----------------------

Spack environments can build on other environments.
You can think of them as combinations of existing environments.
A combined environment is one in which Spack starts with the base environment's configuration and integrates information from existing environments that it includes.

> Existing environments may be specified using their abstract or concrete files.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Existing environments may be specified using their abstract (`spack.yaml`) or concrete (`spack.lock`) files.
```

Including an abstract environment involves adding its ``spack.yaml`` file to the new environment.

> This results in the integration of the configuration information from the included environment into that of the combined environment.

Reviewer 2: I think this should be expanded on a bit with examples

> Including a concrete environment is accomplished by specifying its ``spack.lock`` file.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can include a concrete environment by specifying its ``spack.lock`` file.
```

> In this case, the included concrete environment is integrated into the combined environment's ``spack.lock`` file.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The included concrete environment is then added to the combined environment's ``spack.lock`` file.
```

Adding abstract environments to an environment is similar to including other configuration files in that the configuration information is integrated in essentially the same manner.

> (See :ref:`included_configurations` for more information.)

Reviewer 2: Needs more elaboration

Concrete environment inclusion is different in that the integration involves copying a snapshot of the included concrete environment into the combined concrete environment.

> The remainder of this section focuses on including concrete environments.

Reviewer 2: I feel like this reads like a tech paper -- the documentation should be relatively casual, easy to read, and shouldn't need a roadmap... honestly should make more use of active voice and second person

```suggestion
```
